README.md, before:

# zfs-replicate

A Bash script to automate ZFS Replication.

## Features

- Supports push and pull replication with local and remote datasets
- Supports multiple pool/dataset pairs to replicate
- Everything is logged to syslog by default, and local logging can be configured if desired
- Runs off a well documented `config.sh` file and/or environment variables passed to the script
- Can be run on any schedule using cron
- Includes a `--status` option that can be used to email latest replication status at your preferred schedule.
  Simply add it as a custom script in the email settings under "System > Advanced > Email Reports"

## Warning

Replicating a root dataset to a remote will rewrite the remote pool with forced replication.
This script will create a true 1:1 copy of the source dataset in the destination dataset as currently configured.

The configuration `REPLICATE_SETS="zpoolone:zpooltwo"` will result in `zpooltwo` being a 1:1 copy of `zpoolone` and may
result in data loss on `zpooltwo`.

To replicate a root dataset safely to another pool consider `REPLICATE_SETS="zpoolone:zpooltwo/zpoolone"` instead.

This will result in a 1:1 copy of `zpoolone` in a separate data set of `zpooltwo` and will not affect other datasets
currently present on the destination.

## To Use

Configuration is done via a separate config that may be passed as an option or as the last argument to the script.
The config file is optional. All configuration may also be passed via environment variables. Most options have sane
defaults to keep configuration to a minimum. The script will attempt to locate a file called `config.sh` in the same
directory as the script if one is not passed via the command line.

The config file is very well commented and the contents of the sample config are shown below. The only required
setting without a default is `REPLICATE_SETS`. The script will error out on launch if required configuration
is not met.

### Available Command Line Options

```shell
Usage: ./zfs-replicate.sh [options] [config]

Bash script to automate ZFS Replication

Options:
  -c, --config <configFile>    bash configuration file
  -s, --status                 print most recent log messages to stdout
  -h, --help                   show this message
```

### Config File and Environment Variable Reference

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash
## zfs-replicate configuration file
# shellcheck disable=SC2034

## Datasets to replicate. These must be zfs paths not mount points.
## The format general format is "source:destination".
## Examples replicating a local source to a remote destination (PUSH):
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset:destinationPool@host
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset:destinationPool/destinationDataset@host
## Examples replicating from a remote source to a local destination (PULL):
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset@host:destinationPool
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset@host:destinationPool/destinationDataset
## Examples replicating a local source to a local destination:
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset:destinationPool
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset:destinationPool/destinationDataset
## Multiple space separated sets may be specified.
## Pools and dataset pairs must exist on the respective servers.
#REPLICATE_SETS="localpool/localdataset:remotepool/remotedataset"

## Allow replication of root datasets.
## If "REPLICATE_SETS" contains root datasets and "ALLOW_ROOT_DATASETS" is
## NOT set to 1, root datasets will be skipped and a warning will be printed.
## 0 - disable (default)
## 1 - enable (use at your own risk)
#ALLOW_ROOT_DATASETS=0

## Option to recursively snapshot children of all datasets listed above.
## 0 - disable (default)
## 1 - enable
#RECURSE_CHILDREN=0

## The number of snapshots to keep for each dataset.
## Older snapshots, by creation date, will be deleted.
## A minimum of 2 snapshots must be kept for replication to work.
## This defaults to 2 if not set.
#SNAP_KEEP=2

## Option to write logs to syslog via the "logger" tool.
## 0 - disable
## 1 - enable (default)
#SYSLOG=1

## Optional logging facility to use with syslog. The default facility
## is "user" unless changed below. Other common options include local
## facilities 0-7.
## Example: local0, local1, local2, local3, local4, local5, local6, or local7
#SYSLOG_FACILITY="user"

## The following substitutions for current date information
## may be used in the "TAG" setting below.
## These are evaluated at runtime.
##   - %DOW% = Day of Week (date "+%a")
##   - %MOY% = Month of Year (date "+%m")
##   - %DOM% = Day of Month (date "+%d")
##   - %CYR% = Current Year (date "+%Y")
##   - %NOW% = Current Unixtime (date "+%s")

## String used for snapshot names and log tags.
## Example: pool0/someplace@autorep-08242024_1724527527
## The default is "%MOY%%DOM%%CYR%_%NOW%"
#TAG="%MOY%%DOM%%CYR%_%NOW%"

## The log file needs to start with "autorep-" in order for log cleanup
## to work using the default below is strongly suggested. Leaving this commented out
## will disable the writing of the standalone log file. The "%TAG%" substitution
## and/or other date substitutions may be used. The default is "autorep-%TAG%.log"
## When enabled logs will be placed under the "LOG_BASE" path set above.
#LOG_FILE="autorep-%TAG%.log"

## Number of log files to keep. Note, this is only used
## if "LOG_BASE" is set to a non-empty value above.
## Older logs, by creation date, will be deleted.
## This defaults to 5 if not set.
#LOG_KEEP=5

## Set the destination for physical log files to reside. By default
## logging is done via syslog. This setting will always be treated as a
## directory and not a file.
#LOG_BASE="/var/log/zfs-replicate"

## Path to the system "logger" executable.
## The default uses the first "logger" executable found in $PATH.
#LOGGER=$(which logger)

## Path to GNU "find" binary. Solaris find does not support the "-maxdepth"
## option, which is required to rotate log files.
## On solaris 11, GNU find is typically located at "/usr/bin/gfind".
## The default uses the first "find" executable in $PATH.
## This is NOT required when using syslog.
#FIND=$(which find)

## Path to the system "zfs" binary. The default uses the first "zfs"
## executable found in $PATH.
#ZFS=$(which zfs)

## Path to the system "ssh" binary. You may also include custom arguments
## to SSH here or in the "DEST_PIPE_WITH_HOST" option above.
## Example: SSH="ssh -l root" to login as root to target host.
## The default uses the first "ssh" executable found in $PATH.
#SSH=$(which ssh)

## Set the pipe to the destination pool. But DO NOT INCLUDE the pipe (|)
## character in this setting. Filesystem  names from the source will be
## sent to the destination. For increased transfer speed to remote hosts you
## may want to customize ssh ciphers or include mbuffer.
## The macro %HOST% string will be substituted with the value of the "@host"
## target in the replication set.
## The default WITH a "@host" option is "ssh %HOST% zfs receive -vFd"
## The default WITHOUT a "@host" option is "zfs receive -vFd".
#DEST_PIPE_WITH_HOST="$SSH %HOST% $ZFS receive -vFd"
#DEST_PIPE_WITHOUT_HOST="$ZFS receive -vFd"

## Command to check the health of a source or destination host.
## A return code of 0 is considered OK/available.
## This is only used when a replicate set contains an "@host" option.
## The macro string "%HOST%" will be substituted with the value of
## the "@host" target in the replicate set.
## The default command is "ping -c1 -q -W2 %HOST%".
#HOST_CHECK="ping -c1 -q -W2 %HOST%"
```

## Example Usage

### With Config File

```shell
./zfs-replicate.sh config.sh
```

### With Environment Variables

```shell
LOG_BASE="./logs" SYSLOG=0 SSH="ssh -l root" REPLICATE_SETS="srcPool/srcFS:destPool/destFS@host" ./zfs-replicate.sh
```

## Notes

If you use this script, let me know, also please report issues via GitHub so this may be improved.

Commit message:

add fallback option to revert to full send on missing base snapshot

README.md, after:

# zfs-replicate

A Bash script to automate ZFS Replication.

## Features

- Supports push and pull replication with local and remote datasets
- Supports multiple pool/dataset pairs to replicate
- Everything is logged to syslog by default, and local logging can be configured if desired
- Runs off a well documented `config.sh` file and/or environment variables passed to the script
- Can be run on any schedule using cron
- Includes a `--status` option that can be used to email latest replication status at your preferred schedule.
  Simply add it as a custom script in the email settings under "System > Advanced > Email Reports"

## Warning

Replicating a root dataset to a remote will rewrite the remote pool with forced replication.
This script will create a true 1:1 copy of the source dataset in the destination dataset as currently configured.

The configuration `REPLICATE_SETS="zpoolone:zpooltwo"` will result in `zpooltwo` being a 1:1 copy of `zpoolone` and may
result in data loss on `zpooltwo`.

To replicate a root dataset safely to another pool consider `REPLICATE_SETS="zpoolone:zpooltwo/zpoolone"` instead.

This will result in a 1:1 copy of `zpoolone` in a separate data set of `zpooltwo` and will not affect other datasets
currently present on the destination.

## To Use

Configuration is done via a separate config that may be passed as an option or as the last argument to the script.
The config file is optional. All configuration may also be passed via environment variables. Most options have sane
defaults to keep configuration to a minimum. The script will attempt to locate a file called `config.sh` in the same
directory as the script if one is not passed via the command line.

The config file is very well commented and the contents of the sample config are shown below. The only required
setting without a default is `REPLICATE_SETS`. The script will error out on launch if required configuration
is not met.

### Available Command Line Options

```shell
Usage: ./zfs-replicate.sh [options] [config]

Bash script to automate ZFS Replication

Options:
  -c, --config <configFile>    bash configuration file
  -s, --status                 print most recent log messages to stdout
  -h, --help                   show this message
```

### Config File and Environment Variable Reference

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash
## zfs-replicate configuration file
# shellcheck disable=SC2034

## Datasets to replicate. These must be zfs paths not mount points.
## The format general format is "source:destination".
## Examples replicating a local source to a remote destination (PUSH):
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset:destinationPool@host
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset:destinationPool/destinationDataset@host
## Examples replicating from a remote source to a local destination (PULL):
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset@host:destinationPool
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset@host:destinationPool/destinationDataset
## Examples replicating a local source to a local destination:
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset:destinationPool
##   - sourcePool/sourceDataset:destinationPool/destinationDataset
## Multiple space separated sets may be specified.
## Pools and dataset pairs must exist on the respective servers.
#REPLICATE_SETS="localpool/localdataset:remotepool/remotedataset"

## Allow replication of root datasets.
## If "REPLICATE_SETS" contains root datasets and "ALLOW_ROOT_DATASETS" is
## NOT set to 1, root datasets will be skipped and a warning will be printed.
## 0 - disable (default)
## 1 - enable (use at your own risk)
#ALLOW_ROOT_DATASETS=0

## Option to recursively snapshot children of all datasets listed above.
## 0 - disable (default)
## 1 - enable
#RECURSE_CHILDREN=0

## The number of snapshots to keep for each dataset.
## Older snapshots, by creation date, will be deleted.
## A minimum of 2 snapshots must be kept for replication to work.
## This defaults to 2 if not set.
#SNAP_KEEP=2

## Option to write logs to syslog via the "logger" tool.
## 0 - disable
## 1 - enable (default)
#SYSLOG=1

## Optional logging facility to use with syslog. The default facility
## is "user" unless changed below. Other common options include local
## facilities 0-7.
## Example: local0, local1, local2, local3, local4, local5, local6, or local7
#SYSLOG_FACILITY="user"

## The following substitutions for current date information
## may be used in the "TAG" setting below.
## These are evaluated at runtime.
##   - %DOW% = Day of Week (date "+%a")
##   - %MOY% = Month of Year (date "+%m")
##   - %DOM% = Day of Month (date "+%d")
##   - %CYR% = Current Year (date "+%Y")
##   - %NOW% = Current Unixtime (date "+%s")

## String used for snapshot names and log tags.
## Example: pool0/someplace@autorep-08242024_1724527527
## The default is "%MOY%%DOM%%CYR%_%NOW%"
#TAG="%MOY%%DOM%%CYR%_%NOW%"

## The log file needs to start with "autorep-" in order for log cleanup
## to work using the default below is strongly suggested. Leaving this commented out
## will disable the writing of the standalone log file. The "%TAG%" substitution
## and/or other date substitutions may be used. The default is "autorep-%TAG%.log"
## When enabled logs will be placed under the "LOG_BASE" path set above.
#LOG_FILE="autorep-%TAG%.log"

## Number of log files to keep. Note, this is only used
## if "LOG_BASE" is set to a non-empty value above.
## Older logs, by creation date, will be deleted.
## This defaults to 5 if not set.
#LOG_KEEP=5

## Set the destination for physical log files to reside. By default
## logging is done via syslog. This setting will always be treated as a
## directory and not a file.
#LOG_BASE="/var/log/zfs-replicate"

## Path to the system "logger" executable.
## The default uses the first "logger" executable found in $PATH.
#LOGGER=$(which logger)

## Path to GNU "find" binary. Solaris find does not support the "-maxdepth"
## option, which is required to rotate log files.
## On solaris 11, GNU find is typically located at "/usr/bin/gfind".
## The default uses the first "find" executable in $PATH.
## This is NOT required when using syslog.
#FIND=$(which find)

## Path to the system "zfs" binary. The default uses the first "zfs"
## executable found in $PATH.
#ZFS=$(which zfs)

## Path to the system "ssh" binary. You may also include custom arguments
## to SSH here or in the "DEST_PIPE_WITH_HOST" option above.
## Example: SSH="ssh -l root" to login as root to target host.
## The default uses the first "ssh" executable found in $PATH.
#SSH=$(which ssh)

## Set the pipe to the destination pool. But DO NOT INCLUDE the pipe (|)
## character in this setting. Filesystem  names from the source will be
## sent to the destination. For increased transfer speed to remote hosts you
## may want to customize ssh ciphers or include mbuffer.
## The macro %HOST% string will be substituted with the value of the "@host"
## target in the replication set.
## The default WITH a "@host" option is "ssh %HOST% zfs receive -vFd"
## The default WITHOUT a "@host" option is "zfs receive -vFd".
#DEST_PIPE_WITH_HOST="$SSH %HOST% $ZFS receive -vFd"
#DEST_PIPE_WITHOUT_HOST="$ZFS receive -vFd"

## Command to check the health of a source or destination host.
## A return code of 0 is considered OK/available.
## This is only used when a replicate set contains an "@host" option.
## The macro string "%HOST%" will be substituted with the value of
## the "@host" target in the replicate set.
## The default command is "ping -c1 -q -W2 %HOST%".
#HOST_CHECK="ping -c1 -q -W2 %HOST%"

## Fallback to full send when source and destination have drifted. It is
## expected that the destination dataset is a 1:1 copy of the source.
## Normally, modification of the remote data set by removing snapshots shared
## with the source would result in a failure. Setting this option to "1" will
## cause the script to fallback to a full send of all source snapshots to
## the destination dataset.
## 0 - disable (default)
## 1 - enable (use at your own risk)
#FALLBACK=0
```

## Example Usage

### With Config File

```shell
./zfs-replicate.sh config.sh
```

### With Environment Variables

```shell
LOG_BASE="./logs" SYSLOG=0 SSH="ssh -l root" REPLICATE_SETS="srcPool/srcFS:destPool/destFS@host" ./zfs-replicate.sh
```

## Notes

If you use this script, let me know, also please report issues via GitHub so this may be improved.
